## Anecdote: Deire Gentner's tests 

The fact that children enjoy making discoveries is sufficiently well known. To harp on their mini-Eureka moments would be rather banal. The following example is noteworthy only for the unusual context in which it occurred. 

Professor Dedre Gentner at Northwestern University is respected and renowned in cognitive science. She and co-workers like to create programs that run on a computer but accomplish tasks like those performed by a human brain. For example, some years ago they created a Structure Mapping Engine (a computing engine, not a mechanical one). Part of this SME was a scanner to scan visible objects, and the engine was designed to report if two objects were similar. To learn how closely the performance of the SME resembled human performance, they designed a test-series that could be worked through by a child as well as by the machine. Their report ran to 50 pages with statistical analyses and numerical measures of how the machine and the children compared. At just one point a particular difference was reported: "... the child cried with delight, 'It's the same ...?" I put the italics. As far as I can tell, the two words got in among the statistics mostly by accident --- the authors give them no attention whatever. But to me, they seem crucial, they show the human motivation. Machines will never approach human behavior, that ceaseless random search for matchings wherever they may pop up, until machines are given some electronic equivalent of delight. 
