## Anecdote: Yasmin 

I was listening to my freckled friend Yasmin who was in a jubilant state. She is quite long-legged and fond of tennis, and had just come off the court. "A triple, Brian, a genuine triple!" I knew what she meant because we had discussed it before: a winning stroke has three totally separate parts. There's the moment of impact, she had caught the ball exactly on her racket's sweet spot; then following its flight, she saw the ball bounce precisely where she had intended, a few inches from both sideline and baseline; and thirdly, of course she had won the point, which gave her the set. It is no wonder that her eyes were bright: any one of those experiences is a treat, and to combine all three in one stroke is what makes a person come back for more. 

Now here's a real puzzle, the hold that reading has on a person's mind. Life has sunshine and shadows, and even Yasmin is not always full of smiles. I'll tell you about a time when she was waiting for a bus in the rain, because the story is reading-related. It was a really dull night, dark and windy. She was alone at the bus-stop, umbrella up, cold and bored, when her eye lit on a scrap of newspaper. The sheet was lying sodden on the sidewalk; the street lights were dim but she was able to trace some of the text, about headache relief. Now, the town had just bought some new buses and the first she knew was the roar of the bus as it left the stop where she was waiting. The new motor was so quiet as it glided to a standstill, it was not until the driver gunned it to go away that Yasmin realized that it was there. My point is, she wasn't even interested in the headaches! &mdash; but reading was just enough of a distraction inish her awareness. And why does reading hold our attention? Because we match the marks on the page with words we already have in memory; reading is a stream of matching successes. 

(The sweet-spot sensation is described on Twig 21 and pleasure from reading on Twig 7 in the Introduction.) 