## Anecdote: Wijdefjord 

We traveled by boat down the west side of a ford for a couple of days, then crossed to the east side and went ashore. The rest of the party made camp, but I was told, “Go a few hundred feet up the hill and make a careful sketch of the panorama to the west.” Following instructions, I climbed up and then sat and sketched all the peaks and valleys I could see. Eventually, finished, I broke off and looked around &mdash; and nothing was familiar! My buddies were in dead ground below the brow where I was sitting, and my recollection of arriving there had been washed away by my concentrating on the sketch. By reasoning I could assure myself that if I took a few steps downhill I would find camp and boats and all, but as to sensation, it was as if I had been dumped by aliens from a spacecraft. (By boat, of course, we had seen the western shore close up from sea level, but not the high hinterland that I was now looking at.) 

I would like to succeed in conveying the strangeness of that moment. Perhaps one finds a parallel on the first morning of a vacation. One wakes in a strange room and may momentarily wonder, “Where am I?" But that moment is usually brief and fleeting; associations and memories bob up; waking and adjusting to our perceptions is a thing we do every day. But on the hillside, everything was indeed unfamiliar; no recognition, only rational thought, linked me to my earlier life. 

The purpose of that little recollection was to reinforce the opposite point: in daily life at every moment we encounter what's familiar. Life is recognition, we swim in a river of recognition. The sense that what is around us is familiar is like the air we breathe; we don't notice it but it is there. Yes, the window is where it usually is &mdash; yes, the door .... Some part of our vision system is continually scanning (like a TV picture) and reporting that what we see now is like what we saw a few moments ago. 

Another time, I was on an excursion in a group of about twenty people. Amongst the group were three who had written a book together, called Hobbs, Means and Williams. At lunch we were scattered about a cliff-top, perching as best we could on various knobs of rock etc., with Hobbs, Means and Williams among the rest. In fact the authors were in a row and chanced to be in the same order as on the title-page. An insouciant young woman suddenly piped up, crying, “Look, they are in the right order!" It was a link-joy moment for everybody. 
