## Chapter 6 Final chapter --- the take-home message 

We are close to the end and what do I expect to be remembered from all this? Let's return to the question that opened Chapter 1: “I am not a psychologist or philosopher so why does this matter TO ME?” From what has gone before, let me pick out a few pieces and offer an answer in four parts. 

First, the raindrop analogy. Anyone will agree that rainstorms matter: sometimes they cause destructive floods but more often they foster growth (and when rain follows a dry spell, the smell of freshness is one of nature's treats). But what is a rainstorm? It is an accumulation of droplets. Does a rain droplet matter to me? NO, it doesn't --- but an accumulation of uncountable droplets freshens my life. Most single link-joy events are non-essential; we could survive missing any one. But a day when we do not feel their cumulative effect is a dreary day indeed. Anyone who thinks that tiny link-joys are not important should compare them with raindrops. 

Second, the shouting-murmuring analogy. How quiet can a sound be and still be detectable? A few quiet sounds are: leaves rustling, one sock or stocking rubbing against another, or the noise from shaking a handkerchief. Two people talking make much more noise and yet are nowhere near the loudest sound one can tolerate. The range of sounds is enormous and goes downward to tiny levels, yet the entire range is handled by a single sensory system. We can imagine then that with link-joy as well, the range from conspicuous down to imperceptible is all handled by a single brain-system. 

The third part concerns novelty and the idea that novelty is a bigger influence than matching or sameness. Being bored is common, and bored people welcome any diversion; the relief is a pleasure, often large enough to be noticed. If I look back over a day, the moments I recall may be mostly moments when something fresh happened. All this is true, and pleasure from moments when “something happened” is real and important. My point is that as well, pleasure from moments of link-joy is important too. Many link-joy moments are less noticeable than moments when something new happens, but they are more fundamental. Psychologists should not stop studying novelty but they should start studying link-joy as well. And ordinary people should go on seeking new tunes, new books, new friends. But don't forget to allow for the vast amounts of quiet pleasure we get from old tunes, books and friends. They are the firm foundation that allows us to leap into what's new. 

The last point concerns the daily news, which is mostly bad. News is delivered by newscasters of one kind or another; they make money by attracting customers and selling what customers will buy. Because link-joy is so common it is not news --- grief, harm and disasters bring in more money. Every year the means of distributing more news to more people become more powerful, and so news about unhappiness is a swelling flood --- and a distorting flood: the world is a far happier place than you would guess from the supply of news. Now, to some extent people shape the cities and communities they live in and, if this is so, we need people to see things as they are and not in some distorted form. That is, we need to counter the trend by remembering the distortion. We need to remember omnipresent link-joy (among other daily pleasures) when we try to guide our communities into the future. I speculated in Chapter 5 that perhaps link-joy played a role in where people come from. Now I am suggesting, more definitely, that it needs to be recognized whenever we look at where we are headed. 

People in general are not killers. Our struggles against poverty, drugs etc. are not war. For most people, tomorrow's experiences will not include violence. Given the option of dying tonight, people prefer to wake to see tomorrow and that is because tomorrow is good --- it will be full of link-joy. To plan for tomorrow, we need to see tomorrow it is likely to be. It may contain a few link-joys on the scale of shouts, but it will surely contain a multitude on the scale of murmurs; the multitude will gather like raindrops and sweep through the day like a fresh spring shower. If it did not, why would we so constantly wish to see tomorrow? We give each other floods of link-joy all the time; let's not ignore, let's notice and remember that. 
